JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: Good evening.
I'’m Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BARACK OBAMA, PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES:
Send clear message to Russia or
others not
to do this to us, because we can
do stuff
to you.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: President Obama talks
about Russian
hacking, the crisis in Syria,
and what Democrats
need to do differently, in his
final year-end
news conference.
Then, a global movement --
Italy's fastest
growing political party embraces
the anti-establishment
ideals becoming popular around
the world.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: This is where
we see a
parallel with Brexit and the
United States.
There is a sense of the
dispossessed, of the
disenfranchised, those who feel
they don't
really have a voice anymore.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: And it's Friday, Mark
Shields and
Ramesh Ponnuru analyze a full
week of news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour".
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: President Obama
strongly suggested
today that Russian President
Vladimir Putin
was at the heart of the computer
hacks on
the Democratic Party.
And he defended his
administration's restrained
response in his year-end news
conference.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
OBAMA: Hello, everybody.
WOODRUFF: As expected, the issue
of alleged
Russian hacking of the U.S.
election dominated
President Obama's last news
conference of
the year.
It came one day after
President-elect Trump
tweeted, "If Russia or some
other entity was
asking, why did the White House
wait so long
to act?
Why did they only complain after
Hillary lost?"
Asked about that, Mr. Obama
pointed out that
the White House had told the
public about
Russia's role, and that he
personally had
told Vladimir Putin to, quote,
"cut it out,"
but added:
OBAMA: How we approach an
appropriate response
that increases costs for them
for behavior
like this in the future, but
does not create
problems for us is something
that's worth
taking the time to think about
and figure
out.
And that's exactly what we've
done.
WOODRUFF: All this comes just
days after reports
emerged that intelligence
officials concluded
Russian President Vladimir Putin
was directly
involved in efforts to influence
last month's
election in favor of Mr. Trump.
OBAMA: Not much happens in
Russia without
Vladimir Putin.
I will confirm that this
happened at the highest
levels of the Russian
government, and I will
let you make that determination
as to whether
there are high level Russian
officials who
go off rogue and decide to
tamper with the
U.S. election process without
Vladimir Putin
knowing about it.
WOODRUFF: Former Democratic
presidential candidate
Hillary Clinton told supporters
last night
the hack was the result of
Putin's, quote,
"personal beef" with her and
contributed to
her stunning loss.
The Kremlin denied the
accusations today,
saying the U.S. has yet to
provide any proof
of Russian involvement.
Back at the White House,
President Obama was
careful when he was asked about
President-
elect Trump's perceived close
relationship
with Russia.
OBAMA: He was very complimentary
of Mr. Putin
personally.
Now, that wasn't news.
The president-elect during the
campaign said
so.
And some folks who had made a
career out of
being anti-Russian didn't say
anything it.
Over a third of Republican
voters approve
of Vladimir Putin, the former
head of KGB.
Ronald Reagan would roll over in
his grave.
WOODRUFF: Turning to Syria, the
president
spoke of the fall of Aleppo and
the ongoing
humanitarian crisis there.
He rejected criticism the
administration failed
to do enough to stop the civil
war.
OBAMA: I cannot claim that we've
been successful.
And so, that'’s something that --
as is true
with a lot of issues and
problems around the
world -- I have to go to bed
with every night.
But I continue to believe that
it was the
right approach given what
realistically we
could get done, absent a
decision, as I said,
to go into in a much more
significant way.
WOODRUFF: And as for Hillary
Clinton's loss
and the future of the Democratic
Party, the
president said she was treated
unfairly, but
he had a thinly veiled criticism
of her campaign:
OBAMA: I can maybe give counsel
and advice
to the Democratic Party.
And the thing that we have to
spend most time
on -- because it's the thing we
have the most
control over -- is how do we
make sure that
we are showing up in places
where I think
Democratic policies are needed,
where they
are helping, where they are
making a difference,
but where people feel as if
they're not being
heard and where Democrats are
characterized
as coastal, liberal,
latte-sipping, you know,
politically correct out-of-touch
folks?
as coastal, liberal,
latte-sipping, you know,
politically correct out-of-touch
folks?
We have to be in those
communities, OK?
Thank you, everybody.
Mele Kalikimaka.
WOODRUFF: Mr. Obama now heads to
Hawaii to
spend the holidays with the
first family.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: After a week filled
with cabinet
announcements from
President-elect Trump,
it came to a close with a
controversial ambassadorial
nominee, and the last few
rallies for what
he's calling his "thank you"
tour.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT:
Hershey, Pennsylvania was Mr.
Trump's latest
stop last night, where he made a
point of
thanking African-American
supporters, albeit
in front of a largely white
audience.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
PRESIDENT-ELECT: I talk
about crime, I talk about lack
of education,
talk about no jobs, and I'd say,
what the
hell do you have to lose, right?
It's true.
And they're smart and they
picked up on it
like you wouldn't believe.
And you know what else?
They didn't come out to vote for
Hillary.
They didn't come out.
And that was big -- so thank you
to the African-American
community.
BRANGHAM: But exit polls tell a
different
story.
Eight percent of blacks voted
for the president-elect;
88 percent went for Clinton.
The latest transition team
announcement was
Mr. Trump's pick for U.S.
ambassador to Israel
-- David Friedman, who holds
controversial
positions on Israel.
DAVID FRIEDMAN, BANKRUPTCY
LAWYER: A Trump
administration will never
pressure Israel
into a two-state solution or any
other solution
that is against the wishes of
the Israeli
people.
BRANGHAM: Friedman is a
bankruptcy lawyer
from New York who represented
Trump in the
past.
He rejects the two-state
solution as a, quote,
"suicidal peace" and says Jews
who do support
it are worse than Holocaust
collaborators.
And he says the U.S. State
Department -- where
he'll be an employee -- has a,
quote, "100
year history of anti-Semitism."
Friedman also supports the
highly controversial
idea of moving the American
embassy from Tel
Aviv to Jerusalem.
Today, Mr. Trump held meetings
in New York,
including with President Obama's
Secretary
of Homeland Security Jeh
Johnson.
While at the White House, future
chief of
staff Reince Priebus got advice
from current
chief of staff Denis McDonough
and a host
of other former chiefs of staff.
For the "PBS NewsHour", I'’m
William Brangham.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: Thank you, Brangham.
And late today, there were
several late news
reports that President-elect
Trump will nominate
Republican Representative Nick
Mulvaney of
South Carolina to head the White
House Office
of Management and Budget.
The official announcement is
expected on Monday.
In the day's other news: bitter
winter weather
blasted the northeastern U.S.,
closing schools
and roadways amid perilous
driving conditions.
Boston recorded its coldest
temperature on
this day in over a century --
four degrees.
Meanwhile, a blizzard warning
was issued in
Upstate New York, with wind
chills plunging
20 to 30 degrees below zero.
And in New York City, residents
shared their
strategies for surviving the
arctic blast.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: I'’ve heard
it a good
plan to put on layers, so I am
layered up.
I mean, I look like one of those
sandwiches
that you know, three pieces of
bread, and
you got the lettuce and the
tomatoes.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: You got to
keep moving
around, or else if you stay
still your toes
freeze up, your hands freeze up.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: You got to hand it to
them.
Farther west, the Oklahoma City
area had to
contend with freezing rain.
Slick roads were to blame for
three deaths
overnight and over 100 crashes.
The Pentagon says a Chinese
warship has seized
a U.S. Navy underwater drone in
the South
China Sea.
It happened yesterday, northwest
of the Subic
Bay, off the Philippines.
It was believed to be the first
such incident.
Pentagon officials said the
unmanned drone
was collecting unclassified
scientific data.
The U.S. has issued a formal
diplomatic protest,
demanding its return.
North Carolina's Republican
Governor Pat McCrory
signed a law today stripping his
Democratic
successor of some power.
It merges the state's boards of
elections
and ethics, and mandates an
equal number of
Democrats and Republicans.
Governors used to pick a
majority of members
from their own party.
Hundreds of protesters rallied
inside North
Carolina's legislative building
this week,
accusing Republicans of
undermining democracy.
Incoming Governor Roy Cooper has
threatened
to sue.
American drugmaker Mylan has
started selling
a generic version of its EpiPen.
The life-saving allergy
treatment will cost
$300 for a pack of two.
That's half the price of its
branded option.
Earlier this year, high EpiPen
costs triggered
national criticism and inquiries
from Congress.
Stocks closed slightly lower on
Wall Street
today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost more
than eight points to close at
19,843, the
NASDAQ fell 19, and the S&P 500
slipped nearly
four.
For the week, the Dow gained
nearly half a
percent.
Both the NASDAQ and the S&P 500
dropped a
fraction of a percent.
And mourners bid goodbye to a
national hero
today, as John Glenn's casket
lay in honor
at Ohio's state capitol in
Columbus.
The first American astronaut to
orbit the
earth served more than two
decades as a U.S.
senator from Ohio.
He died last week at 95.
Hundreds of visitors paid their
respects at
the first of several events
honoring Glenn.
A memorial service is being held
tomorrow
at Ohio State University.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
evacuations
halted from the besieged Syrian
city of Aleppo,
deadly black lung disease being
diagnosed
in younger coal miners, the
populist ideology
that's sweeping through Italy,
and much more.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: Today brought renewed
doubts about
the durability of the plan to
allow tens of
thousands of civilians and
fighters to leave
Syria's major eastern city,
Aleppo.
Evacuations that began yesterday
abruptly
stopped amid renewed violence
and recriminations.
Meantime, the Assad regime
consolidated its
hold on a sector of the city
rebels held for
more than four years.
We have this report from Dan
Rivers of Independent
Television News, and it'’s from
Aleppo.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
DAN RIVERS, INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS: Less
than 24 hours after it started,
the evacuation
turned into a scramble for
safety.
Mortars had been fired and Red
Crescent vehicles
were forced to abandon the
rescue of tens
of thousands of civilians.
Well, as you can see, the buses
and the Red
Crescent vehicles are pulling
out.
We're hearing the sounds of
mortars.
It's a lot of chaos here, but
what's clear
is that there has been a
breakdown of this
ceasefire.
Within minutes, Syrian soldiers
were reinforcing
the front line as an armored
vehicle ventured
further towards rebel territory.
After an hour, the breakdown in
trust was
total -- trucks dumping rubble
to seal the
escape route.
A convoy, which had already
left, was forced
to turn around.
Women and children waiting in
the biting cold
as negotiations failed.
As this played out, we caught a
rare glimpse
of one of Syria's allies,
Hezbollah soldiers
from Lebanon arriving to bolster
the defenses
along this key road.
And then, the final
confirmation, the plan
to rescue civilians was failing.
The convoy driving back into the
ravaged enclave
they'd only just left.
For those on board, it must've
been as confusing
as it was terrifying.
LINA SHAMY, EAST ALEPPO
RESIDENT: These are
the civilians that are turning
back from the
crossing point from the passage
after it was
closed.
RIVERS: And where it was closed,
officers
were already consolidating their
grip on the
last checkpoint, leaving those
looking on
in no doubt which way the wind
is blowing
now.
Any vestige of the rebels is
rapidly being
expunged, a revolution that has
burnt out
here in Aleppo, leaving behind a
legacy that
horrifies many ordinary people.
LEENA TARSHA, WEST ALEPPO
RESIDENT: It really
breaks my heart to see the city
like this,
the old city like this.
RIVERS: Do you think people in
Aleppo can
forgive each other on each side
of the front
line?
TARSHA: Of course, because if we
couldn't,
we wouldn't have stayed here.
Of course, we can.
Of course like the people, the
people are
strong.
RIVERS: The ceasefire may have
broken down
for now.
But there's no reversing
President Assad's
victory here -- a position of
strength, which
seems unassailable, but one
which has been
achieved at the cost of this
city's people
and heritage.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: Black lung disease is
well known
for causing the deaths of
thousands of American
coal miners over decades.
Now, a new report finds that
miners may be
suffering from the most advanced
form of the
disease at a rate ten times
higher than what
the U.S. government has
reported.
Hari Sreenivasan in our New York
studios has
the story.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
HARI SREENIVASAN, PBS NEWSHOUR:
For the past
five years, the government has
reported just
under 100 cases of complicated
black lung
disease, which is also called
progressive
massive fibrosis.
But a new NPR investigation
found nearly 1,000
cases in nearly the same time
from clinic
reports in four states --
Virginia, West Virginia,
Pennsylvania and Ohio.
The extent of the problem has
stunned a number
of researchers and experts who
work with miners
as well.
One of the miners diagnosed with
black lung
and profiled in the NPR stories
-- Mackie
Branham -- spoke of just how
difficult it
is for him to breathe and his
ill health.
But he said mining was in his
blood.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
MACKIE BRANHAM, DIAGNOSED WITH
BLACK LUNG:
Takes a lot of pressure in my
chest at all
times.
I'’ve never been scared to death.
It don't bother me a bit.
It's just I won't see my kids
grow up.
But if I had it to do over, I
would do it
again.
If that's what it took to
provide for my family.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
SREENIVASAN: Howard Berkes has
been uncovering
this in a two- part series that
concludes
tonight on "All Things
Considered" and he
joins me now from Salt Lake
City.
Howard, it is so difficult to
hear that man
struggling to breathe, and it's
also hard
to reconcile how he says he
would do this
again because this is what he
would do for
his family, even though the
health challenges
that he and so many people in
this community
are facing.
HOWARD BERKES, NPR: It's so
common to hear
that.
Miners want to go back to work.
Mackie Branham told me if he
could get a lung
transplant tomorrow, he hopes he
could go
back to work, which is not going
to happen.
But mining, as he said, is in
his blood.
It's part of the local culture,
local history.
Generations of families mine and
it really
is about the only decent job in
most parts
of Appalachia.
SREENIVASAN: All right.
Let's talk about the gap between
the numbers
here, the numbers the government
documented
and the numbers you're able to
uncover in
your investigation.
What accounts for this?
BERKES: Well, first of all, it's
the limitations
on government researchers.
This is the National Institute
for Occupational
Safety and Health, and they
track black lung
disease by bringing in miners
for x-rays.
But they're limited by law to
only testing
working miners, number one, and
the x-rays
are voluntary, number two.
So, they miss non-working
miners, people who've
retired, and they're also
missing a huge segment,
most miners, really, who avoid
getting tested
because they fear if there's a
positive test
for black lung, somehow their
mining company
will figure out and they will
lose their jobs.
SREENIVASAN: But that's illegal.
BERKES: It's illegal but miners
widely believe
it.
Every single miner I'’ve talked
to in Appalachia
in the last five years has said
the same thing.
What they fear is just even
going to the NIOSH
Vans that come into their
communities with
x-ray equipments and being seen
going into
the vans, just that could cause
the mining
company to say this guy might
have black lung.
And mining -- the last mining
company you
worked for is the mining company
that saddled
with your black lung benefits
and your healthcare.
And so, you could have worked
for another
mining company for 20 years, but
if you worked
for the last one for a year,
they're the ones
that pay.
And so, miners believe that if
the mining
company finds out, they'll lose
their jobs,
so they don't get tested.
SREENIVASAN: This is also one of
the worst
forms of black lung.
Is there something different
that's happening
in the mining that's happening
now that'’s
increasing the likelihood they
get the worst
form of it?
BERKES: Well, for at least a
decade or so,
the big coal mining seams in
Appalachia have
played out and there are thinner
seams now,
and those thinner seams have
coal mixed in
with rock.
That rock contains silica, and
they mine the
rock and coal together, and so,
their silica
dust mixed in with the coal
dust, with the
coal dust, and silica is
especially toxic
and that is believed to be the
cause of this
very more serious stages of
disease that are
affecting these miners.
It's also causing them to get
black lung a
lot younger than what was
typically used to
be when you would see miners
maybe in their
60s and 70s.
We'’ve talked to miners in their
30s and
40s who are now getting this
most serious
stage of black lung.
SREENIVASAN: All right.
So, what happens to a miner with
this sort
of the disease?
I mean, who pays for it
especially when so
many small coal companies are
going bankrupt
because the energy markets are
favoring natural
gas now?
BERKES: Well, it's also very
large coal companies
going bankrupt.
If the coal company is
self-insured and they
don't have enough assets, then
they're not
going to have enough money to
pay for the
benefits, and the coal company
is first in
line to pay the benefits.
If the coal company can't pay
the benefits
then it shifts to the Federal
Black Lung Trust
Fund, a federal program.
And the problem is if you have
all the miners
coming into the system requiring
black lung
benefits, coal companies are
unable to pay,
then that shifts to taxpayers.
SREENIVASAN: And there'’s an
Affordable Care
Act twist to this as well?
These are pre-existing
conditions if they
went to a different plan, but if
the Affordable
Care Act is repealed, would
these miners lose
these benefits?
BERKES: Well, not only that,
there is in the
Affordable Care Act a specific
benefit for
coal miners with black lung that
makes it
easier for them to get black
lung benefits.
So, if the Affordable Care Act
is repealed,
it will be back to the old days
when it was
much more difficult to get
benefits in the
first place.
SREENIVASAN: All right.
Howard Berkes is joining us from
Salt Lake
with NPR.
Thanks so much.
BERKES: Thank you.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields
and Ramesh Ponnuru take on the
week's news;
a small publisher with a big
impact on literature;
and rethinking how we listen.
But first, earlier this month,
Italian voters
rejected a referendum to alter
that nation's
constitution -- in what was a
stern rebuke
of Prime Minister Matteo Renzi,
who resigned
in the aftermath.
The vote was seen as the latest
instance of
a rising tide of populism both
in Europe,
and here, against elites and the
perceived
establishment.
From Rome, special correspondent
Christopher
Livesay explains.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY, PBS
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT: It started as
just another
protest movement.
Now, it could control the
Italian government
and many in Europe are
terrified.
It's called the Five Star
Movement.
A foul-mouthed comedian named
Beppe Grillo
founded the group only seven
years ago.
Today, the Five Star Movement is
Italy's fastest
growing party, picking off votes
from both
left and right, with a populist
message skewering
the political establishment amid
the punishing
economic fallout of the euro
crisis.
The government has long
dismissed them as
anti-Euro nationalists -- done
so at their
now clear, and great peril.
This month, center-left Prime
Minister Matteo
Renzi, a staunch defender of the
European
Union, was forced to resign when
he failed
in a referendum on
constitutional reforms
that would have weakened the
powers of the
senate, in order to streamline
the legislative
process.
The Five Star Movement
campaigned hardest
against Renzi.
New elections are expected early
next year.
And it's the Five Star Movement
with the wind
in its sails.
Franco Pavoncello is a professor
of political
science and the president of
John Cabot University
in Rome.
FRANCO PAVONCELLO, JOHN CABOT
UNIVERSITY IN
ROME: The Five Star Movement is
basically
a rejectionist party that feels
that the entire
political spectrum has been
disqualified by
decades of bad management,
corruption, economic
decline, where the people are
much poorer
than their grandparents.
And this is where we see a
parallel with Brexit
and the United States.
There is a sense of the
dispossessed, of the
disenfranchised, those who feel
they don't
really have a voice anymore.
LIVESAY: That voice is channeled
in parliament
by lawmakers like Manlio Di
Stefano, a leading
figure in the movement.
What will a Five Star Movement
government
look like?
MANLIO DI STEFANO, MEMBER OF
PARLIAMENT, FIVE
STAR MOVEMENT: How will we
govern?
How will people give us the
numbers?
People will give us the numbers.
We are sure 100 percent that the
next political
election, people will realize
that Five Star
Movement against the rest of the
establishment.
LIVESAY: So it's the Five Star
Movement against
everyone else.
DI STEFANO: I think, yes.
LIVESAY: At just 35-years-old,
Di Stefano
epitomizes the youthful
rebellion at the heart
of the movement, telling his
parliamentary
rivals they'd never worked a
real job in their
lives.
Italians like Roberta Maggi who
feel increasingly
left behind are the core of the
Five Star
Movement's support.
Last year, the landlord shut off
the single
mother's heat and hot water when
she lost
her job as a secretary, and
could no longer
afford rent.
She heats up pots of water on
the stove and
she washes her kids her in the
sink.
ROBERTA MAGGI, UNEMPLOYED SINGLE
MOTHER (translated):
You see what I'’m going through?
Sometimes I just break down.
LIVESAY: With Christmas just
around the corner,
she faces eviction this very
morning.
Neighbors and friends have
rallied to her
side.
Among them: Roberta Lombardi,
another member
of parliament from the Five Star
Movement.
ROBERTA LOMBARDI, MEMBER OF
PARLIAMENT, FIVE
STAR MOVEMENT: We are here to
try to stop
this eviction.
LIVESAY: And stop it she did, at
least for
now.
The court officials left when
they saw the
crowd.
Have you ever seen another party
ever done
so much for you?
MAGGI (translated): No.
Never.
It's never happened before.
LIVESAY: Stunts like these have
made the Five
Star Movement vulnerable to
charges of populism
-- a charge they relish.
DI STEFANO: So, a lot of people
say to us,
this thing that you do makes you
a populist.
And we always say, OK, if you
consider to
be populist just taking care of
people, we
are proud to be populist!
But the truth is that everyone
in this building,
in parliament, should be a
little bit populist,
meaning they should consider the
people's
needs.
Otherwise, you are doing your
own interests.
LIVESAY: Populism is thriving
across Europe,
as economies in the common
market struggle,
and immigration booms.
While less extreme than other
European populists,
Five Star Movement leaders
insist migrants
denied asylum should be
immediately deported.
And, they've been accused of
circulating fake
news about migrants to incite
their followers.
Patrizio Nissirio is a senior
editor at ANSA,
Italy's leading news agency.
He says fake news is exploding
across Europe.
PATRIZIO NISSIRIO, ANSA NEWS
AGENCY: It's
such a danger that figures like
Pope francs
warned the press not to spread.
He actually made a strong
parallel between
feces and this kind of news.
LIVESAY: Nissirio points to one
fake news
story accusing the government of
stuffing
ballot boxes.
NISSIRIO: No, this is a
completely bogus story.
There's no reality about it.
But the reaction on the social
network was
impressive.
Over 230,000 reacted to this on
the social
network.
LIVESAY: Rula Jebreal is an
international
affairs analyst.
RULA JEBREAL, AMERICAN
UNIVERSITY OF ROME:
Oh, Russia is the real winner of
all of this.
I mean, they kill the news
itself by creating
-- by flooding the market with
fake news.
Look, globally, wee have a
presidential candidate,
president-elect who told the
Russians, yes,
please hack the Democratic
National Committee
and release the emails, I want
you to release
the emails, inviting them
actually to the
party.
We have Marie Le Pen, Madam Le
Pen in France
who asked the Russians to give
her $7 million
so she could run a campaign.
And the Five Stars here are
selecting these
kinds of news.
It's a national security threat,
what we're
seeing.
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY, PBS
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT: The Five Star
movement denies
it has a pro- Russian agenda.
But some of their policy
proposals would benefit
Russia, such as pushing for
Italy to leave
NATO, and for the E.U. to end
sanctions on
Russia for annexing Crimea in
2014.
MANLIO DI STEFANO, MEMBER OF
PARLIAMENT, FIVE
STAR MOVEMENT: We want to cut
these sanctions.
LIVESAY: You want to cut
European union sanctions
against Russia.
DI STEFANO: Yes.
The only ones that are losing
money are the
European people.
They did something that was just
a demonstration
of power -- Europe against
Russia.
And Russia is winning.
LIVESAY: Indeed, it's the Five
Star movement's
Euro skepticism that's shaken
investors and
much of Europe.
If elected, they've promised to
hold a referendum
on abandoning the Euro currency.
As the Eurozone's third-largest
economy, Italy's
exit could be disastrous.
The government is now in the
hands of an interim
cabinet, and new elections must
be held.
According to polls, the Five
Star Movement
won't win an all-out majority.
But they're confident that the
polls are wrong
-- just as they were for another
political
iconoclast: Donald Trump.
DI STEFANO: He made his campaign
having against
him the full establishment
system.
And everybody was really against
him.
We are facing the same thing in
Italy.
And we will succeed like they
did.
But as I said, we will really do
what we are
promising.
LIVESAY: For the "PBS NewsHour",
I'’m Christopher
Livesay, in Rome.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: And to
the analysis of Shields and
Ponnuru.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
Ramesh Ponnuru of "The National
Review."
David Brooks is away.
Welcome to both of you.
Let's start out, Mark, by
talking about this
back and forth.
Every day, there's a new piece
of information
about it did between what Donald
Trump is
saying about whether the
Russians were involved
in this hacking of the
Democratic National
Committee and what the CIA and
now the FBI,
President Obama weighed in today
on this.
What are we to make of all this?
MARK SHIELDS, SYNDICATED
COLUMNIST: I think
what we're to make of it is, to
me what's
fascinating is not what Donald
Trump is in
no particular position to know,
but what's
most alarming to me is Donald
Trump will become
president of the United States,
he won the
election.
This is not about who won the
He will become the 45th
president the 20th
of January.
It is about whether the
sovereignty and
self-determination
of the United States was
compromised by an
organized at the highest Russian
levels, which
means the imprimatur of Mr.
Putin, espionage,
sabotage of the American
democratic system.
And there is an office in this
country that's
higher than that of president
and it's patriot,
and John McCain is filling that
right now,
and John McCain is saying, these
are questions
that must be answered, that
these are questions
that demand an answer.
And the idea, as Mitch
McConnell, the Republican
Senate majority leader, says,
sending it to
the Intelligence Committee is a
way of sending
it to limbo because we had -- we
spent $40
million in five years in the
Intelligence
Committee investigating torture
at Abu Ghraib,
we have yet to get a report
about it.
That'’s a nice way of saying, oh,
it'’s
national security, we can'’ t
talk about
it.
We will not get a 9/11
Commission.
But I think John McCain and the
Armed Services
Committee with Jack Reed, the
Democrat, with
Lindsey Graham and others, and
Tim Kaine in
a pretty damn good committee, I
think you
will get an honest hearing and
we need it.
The idea people are so concerned
about a $500,000
contribution to the Clinton
Foundation changing
and influencing American policy
somehow indirectly
and incurious about Russia's
involvement and
sabotaging an American election
is unforgivable
to me and irrational.
WOODRUFF: Ramesh, do you think
this will be
investigated thoroughly?
RAMESH PONNURU, NATIONAL REVIEW:
I think this
controversy is expanding in all
directions.
You're going to have an
investigation.
You're going to have a report
from the administration.
During the a press conference,
President Obama
said there would be a report
tying loose ends,
tying it all together before he
leaves office.
And then you'’re going to have
the hearings
over the configuration of Trump
secretary
of state nominee, Rex Tillerson,
where I believe
the number one topic and
probably number two
topic as well is going to be the
administration's
intentions toward Russia.
Trump is going to be our third
president in
a row coming into office wanting
friendly
relations with Russia.
But, of course, this incredible
backdrop now
is going to color everything.
WOODRUFF: Well, Mark, getting to
what both
of you are saying, this does
leave a cloud
-- a dark cloud hanging over the
question
of our democracy.
I mean, if another nation,
unfriendly, to
put it I guess in the best
terms, can come
in and leak and get information
and have it
leaked at will, what does that
say about our
system of government?
SHIELDS: Well, I mean, it says
-- no, I mean,
it says that, A, we're
vulnerable to such
attacks and, B, that we're
manipulated and
could be manipulated by Russia.
I mean, Russia, this is not a
one-off for
Russia.
I mean, Russia'’s done it already
in Germany
and Italy and democracies in
Western Europe
and Eurasia.
I mean, and it'’s -- and they're
good at
it.
Let's be very blunt, it's not a
major investment
of time or money.
It is of talent and skill, and
they have been
very good at it.
But, Judy, I mean, the question
is -- obviously,
it's on everybody's mind -- is
why did they
just reveal John Podesta's and
the Democratic
National Convention and Debbie
Wasserman Schultz
--
WOODRUFF: Exactly.
SHIELDS: -- and the Democratic
campaigns,
and only attempt, according to
reports and
the best evidence, to get into
one Republican
staffer's email who had long
since left the
committee?
And if, in fact, they did have
Republican
-- why that wasn't leaked?
So, it does raise questions
about where Putin's
affections and loyalties lay in
this election.
WOODRUFF: Ramesh, the president
was very careful
about the way he spoke about it
today.
He mentioned in his news
conference, but a
lot of people are just -- are
saying they're
now convinced that the Russians,
Vladimir
Putin was trying to hurt Hillary
Clinton and
help Donald Trump.
PONNURU: Well, yes, that does
seem to be the
view, at least based on the
latest reporting
of the U.S. government.
I think, though, that one of the
things that
President Obama was trying to do
is to not
allow that to be the
conversation that consumes
the Democrats as they figure out
what happened
in this election.
He also made a big point of
talking about
the mistakes the Democrats made,
although
was careful about that, too,
since he didn't
want to personally criticize
Hillary Clinton.
If the Democrats obsess about
the Russian
role in this and they take their
eye off the
ball of some of the reforms they
need to undertake
themselves.
WOODRUFF: But it does -- again,
as both of
you were saying, the suggestion
is if, indeed
it is known, if they conclude at
the end of
the investigation the Russians
were behind
this, something is going to have
to be done.
President Obama said he told
Vladimir Putin,
Mark, to cut it out, but beyond
that we don't
know --
SHIELDS: No, something has to be
done, there'’s
no question, and whether it's
revealing Putin's
own financial situation, his
wheeling and
dealing, embarrassing him,
whatever form of
retaliation.
I thought what was most
interesting, Judy,
was Donald Trump's official
response which
was an attack upon the CIA.
Now, Donald Trump has never
spent time in
Washington, so he's never been
to Langley,
Virginia, where the whole CIA
headquarters.
He would find on the wall of
stars 113 names
of American CIA operatives and
employees who
died defending this country.
And one of them, Hugh Redmond,
was 19 years
a prisoner in Shanghai where he
was tortured
by the Chinese communists.
I should not get ahead of myself
because Donald
Trump doesn't like people who
were captured.
He likes people who weren't
captured.
But, I mean -- but these are
patriots, these
are people who work hard and no
president
coming in should ever disparage
or demean
or denigrate the heroic efforts
these people
go to, to keep us safe.
WOODRUFF: Ramesh, Mark mentioned
Rex Tillerson
who is the choice by Donald
Trump to head
the State Department.
There are going to be these
hearings, his
confirmation hearings.
What do you think is going to
come out of
that?
Do you think he's going to sail
through knowing
what we know now about his close
connections
with Mr. Putin?
PONNURU: My suspicion is he will
not see this
process as one of sailing
through.
I think there'’s going to be
tough questioning.
I do think he comes with some
real advantages.
I think the Republicans, who, of
course, have
a majority in the Senate, tend
to think well
of businessmen, successful
businessmen which
he certainly is.
He's got the support of some
leading Republican
foreign policy establishment
figures.
Apparently, former Vice
President Dick Cheney
is making calls on his behalf.
But absolutely, there are going
to be these
questions about the Russia
policy.
I was saying how Trump will be
the third president
in a row coming in wanting
friendly relations.
It didn't work out for the
previous two.
So, one has to ask whether this
is an ambition
that makes sense for our country
right now.
WOODRUFF: What else about Mr.
Tillerson, Mark,
and then the other I guess
prominent appointee
this week is former Texas
Governor Rick Perry
to run the Energy Department.
We're just about finished now
filling out
the Trump cabinet, at least
those he's nominating,
to take these positions.
Do you think we have a pretty
good sense of
where Donald Trump wants to take
the country
from looking at it?
SHIELDS: I don't, Judy.
I think Mr. Tillerson in all
likelihood will
be confirmed for all the reasons
that Ramesh
addressed.
He'’s got a strong -- Bob Gates
recommended
him.
He'’s got Jim Baker and Condi
Rice weighing
in and it appears the Republican
establishment
is certainly.
He doesn't need Dick Cheney's
support now
as much as the Gates-Rice-Baker
backing.
But that aside, there is always
a presumption
in favor of a president and the
cabinet because
the president gets to choose the
cabinet is.
They don'’t last -- unlike a
judge who's
appointed a life time, that this
greatest
group may attach to.
Rick Perry, irony of ironies,
who can forget
2011 in Auburn Hills, Michigan,
as every Republican
does in a presidential debate
talked about
all the agencies he was going to
get rid of
them, you recall there was
Education and there
was Commerce and that third one
-- whoops
-- and it was Energy.
But here he is and instead of
getting rid
of it -- maybe he's going to get
rid of it.
But the irony, the man who
called Donald Trump
a cancer on the conservative
movement, who
had to be excised, is now
nominated by Donald
Trump showing what a big person
Donald Trump
is to be his secretary of
energy.
WOODRUFF: The last thing I want
to talk to
you about is Syria, President
Obama, Ramesh,
was asked about this today.
We see Aleppo, which is the
rebel stronghold
finally all but completely
falling today to
the Assad regime.
President Obama says, yes, I
take responsibility.
I take responsibility for
everything that
happens on my watch, what -- I
mean, how do
you read the Obama
administration and the
story of what's happened in
Syria?
PONNURU: I don't see how this is
anything
other than a black mark on the
Obama administration's
record.
Of course, there is a temptation
for Americans
to think that everything that
happens in the
world is somehow, you know, our
responsibility,
our fault or our credit.
But here we have a situation
where the administration
pursued a policy that by his own
admission
today was ineffective and where
his continual,
even now he wants to work with
the United
Nations while admitting the
Russians are going
to prevent the United Nations
from doing anything.
WOODRUFF: Mark?
SHIELDS: The villains of the
piece remain
Assad himself, Putin, Iran, al
Qaeda, and
ISIS.
I mean, you'’re talking about the
death.
But the failure of the United
States to be
able to lead any kind of
movement, to save
the humanitarian tragedy, to
avoid and rescue
the innocent suffering there is
a failure,
is a real failure.
I mean, it is -- Aleppo will be
in the same
category as Dresden.
It will be remembered as a
humanitarian disaster.
But the president gets
responsibility, the
Congress are the cowardly lions
in this.
I mean, they talk a big game and
none of them
steps up.
Very few.
I mean, there was Jeff Flake and
Tim Kaine
who were willing to lead an
authorization
of military force, but the
others talk a good
game.
And as far as the "no fly" zone,
there wasn't
the will to impose it, let'’s be
honest,
and there wasn'’t the leadership.
WOODRUFF: And I was struck the
president said
today, every day, he thinks
about, you know,
what more he could have done and
in particularly,
I was struck by he spoke about
the children
who have died in Syria.
Well, it's great to have both of
you here.
Ramesh Ponnuru and Mark Shields,
Friday night.
Thank you both.
SHIELDS: Thank you.
PONNURU: Thank you.
WOODRUFF: OK.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: Now, the story of a
small, but influential
publisher that's succeeding at
making poetry
ever more relevant to the
problems and dynamics
of our time.
Jeffrey Brown reports from
Minnesota.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JEFFREY BROWN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT:
Recommend encouraging --
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Rejection.
BROWN: Rejection.
JEFF SHOTTS, EXECUTIVE EDITOR,
GRAYWOLF PRESS:
An encouraging rejection.
BROWN: An encouraging rejection
as opposed
to what?
SHOTTS: An encouraging
rejection.
BROWN: Jeff Shotts clearly loves
his job.
But one part of it -- sorting
through thousands
of poetry manuscripts every year
-- and rejecting
99 percent of them -- that's not
his favorite.
SHOTTS: I don't want to be the
"rejection
guy".
(LAUGHTER)
SHOTTS: Jeffrey -- rejection is
part of the
equation of being an artist and
not just a
poet.
But, you know, we're receiving
thousands of
poetry submissions.
BROWN: Yes, literally.
SHOTTS: Literally, every year.
And we're publishing about 10 to
12 poetry
books in a year.
And the math of that is very
difficult I think
in one way for poets probably to
hear.
BROWN: I think I saw your
shoulders just slump
as you said it.
SHOTTS: A little bit, yes, yes.
BROWN: Shotts is executive
editor at Graywolf
Press in Minneapolis, a small
but prominent
literary publisher.
SHOTTS: What time was that?
BROWN: One of the hundreds of
sometimes tiny
cogs that keep the world of
poetry alive and
thriving.
And those books Graywolf has
been publishing
-- of many poetic styles and
subjects -- are
getting a lot of attention these
days.
Volumes like Claudia Rankine's
"Citizen",
examining overt and subtle
racism, which has
won numerous prizes and garnered
huge sales.
And more recently, Solmaz
Sharif's "Look"
-- about war and violence -- was
on the short
list for the national book
award.
Two other Graywolf collections
made the long
list.
SHOTTS: We want our poetry books
to be challenging
-- challenging the way that
these are poets
who are engaging with important
social issues
in many cases.
BROWN: Do you think this
accounts in part
for the success -- the recent
success you've
had?
SHOTTS: I think there is
something about the
fact that so many of us in
American culture
are saturated with media,
saturated with social
media maybe in particular.
But the idea of being able to
hold an object
in your hand, it is an
engagement, an individual
engagement with an individual
voice that I
don't think any other art form
than poetry
can provide in the same way.
BROWN: Graywolf was started 42
years ago in
Washington state.
Ten years in, the press came to
Minnesota,
where it found a welcoming home.
SHOTTS: Books that are relevant
to what people
are thinking about.
BROWN: The Twin Cities have
developed a reputation
as a small press Mecca and big
book town.
We visited during its annual
festival of books
where indie locals, who punch
well above their
weight, sold their wares: coffee
house press,
rain taxi review, milkweed
editions, and many
more.
Graywolf's Jeff Shotts says
there's never
been a better time for poetry
publishing.
SHOTTS: The vitality of poetry
right now I
think is at a pitch high.
And I think there are more
people reading
it, engaging with it, performing
it, saying
it out loud, saying it in an
interior way
and making it part of their
daily lives.
BROWN: And a lot of people
writing it -- which
brings us back to that rejection
business.
This past summer, when Graywolf
put out a
call for manuscripts, nearly
2,000 were sent
in.
It's cruel, but you like to see
the number
go down.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Yes.
BROWN: Shotts and colleagues
read every work
submitted, sorted them into yes
and, mostly,
no categories, but also drew
careful distinctions
between "no, not ever" and a
"no, but maybe
someday".
SHOTTS: You know, there was
something in this
that was exciting.
It didn't quite hit for us here,
but, you
know, let's keep in touch and is
there a conversation
that can happen?
That's something I'’m excited
about having
as an ongoing out here
conversation with poets
all over the world.
BROWN: You would reject people
several times,
but keep talking.
SHOTTS: Absolutely.
BROWN: And then eventually
something would
come.
SHOTTS: This has certainly
happened and we've
had marvelous books as a result
of it.
BROWN: And his advice to those
who don't make
the cut?
SHOTTS: I don't think it makes
someone less
of a poet not to be published.
They are still a poet.
So, there's publishing and then
there's poetry.
Yes, those things can go hand in
hand in a
way to present particular kinds
of poetry.
But more often than not, poetry
is also meant
to be performed or spoken or
shared intimately.
That is absolutely the place
where poetry
is inside our lives.
BROWN: From Minneapolis, I'’m
Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS NewsHour".
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: This fall, tensions
around free
speech and political
sensitivities have erupted
on several college campuses.
"New Yorker" writer Nathan
Heller wonders
if listening differently might
help.
Tonight, Nathan brings us the
latest installment
in our series "#IMHO", "In My
Humble Opinion".
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
NATHAN HELLER, THE NEW YORKER:
We've been
hearing a lot about free speech
on campus,
yet the crucial challenge now
isn't what we're
free to express.
It's how we listen.
Solving college's problems
today, I believe,
paradoxically means listening
less like wise
scholars and more like
travelers.
Americans who got out of town
this summer
might recall the feeling.
Around the house, we know what
we're listening
for.
An early clap on the porch means
that the
newspaper has arrived.
The dishwasher making that weird
sound again
calls for the usual repair.
We tune out the announcements on
the subway.
When we travel, however, we
listen differently.
We process everything with fresh
ears.
There are no expectations, no
old scripts
to follow.
Part of the problem is language.
Many people get behind the same
abstract words,
and yet their meanings diverge
and harden.
What about that worn-out word
"diversity,"
which recently emerged in a
dispute about
an old mural at Oberlin College.
The painting, a tableau of
several cultures,
including a black man playing
the saxophone
and a South Asian man charming a
snake, had
been created to celebrate
diversity.
But some current students
thought these caricatures
stood for the opposite of
diversity.
They made variety exotic.
The mural was eventually painted
over -- to
the alarm of others, who worried
about censorship
of art.
If all sides listened to the
debate like strangers
in a strange land, what might
they have heard?
They might have noticed that the
mural's right
to exist as art -- as a creative
work reflecting
its moment -- had never been in
question.
Instead, one side thought the
mural was racist.
Another saw it as merely an
artifact of the
past.
"Diversity," as a concept, had
been tossed
around so vaguely that it was
unclear which
was the case.
Travelers listening for the
first time might
not be so sure.
We expect new students to have
disorienting
experiences when they arrive on
campus.
Yet if higher education is
really going to
be worth the name, the listening
needs to
happen on a broader
institutional level, too.
Education, it's sometimes said,
is a journey.
Let's all make sure we hear
enough to make
the trip worthwhile.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: Listening, good advice
for all of
us.
And finally to our "NewsHour
Shares", the
U.S. Transportation Security
Administration
or TSA is making its mark on
social media
with a surprisingly popular
Instagram account,
with pictures of prohibited
items agents deemed
unfit to fly.
The "NewsHour'’s" Julia Griffin
met the man
behind the account.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JULIA GRIFFIN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT:
Guns, knives, and holiday pies,
when it comes
to air travel this month, only
two of the
three will land you on Santa's
naughty list,
but they all could land on TSA's
Instagram
feed.
A click-bait worthy mix of
confiscated security
items and explosive-detecting
dogs, TSA'’s
Instagram has been rated by
"Rolling Stone"
magazine as the app's fourth
best -- right
between pop stars Rihanna and
Beyonce.
BOB BURNS, LEAD SOCIAL MEDIA
SPECIALIST, TSA:
As a former musician, I always
wanted to make
"Rolling Stone," and I never
imagined that
I would make it through social
media with
TSA.
GRIFFIN: Bob Burns runs the
agency's feed.
BURNS: I think they find it
fascinating because
they can'’t believe people are
bringing items
on the plane, like the guns and
the knives
and grenades.
GRIFFIN: Some of the bizarre
highlights include:
a homemade avalanche charger,
this bag of
live eels, a human skull hidden
in a clay
souvenir pot, and, of course,
canines at work
and at play.
BURNS: You can never go wrong
with the dogs.
GRIFFIN: But the most-liked
post?
This full-sized dummy corpse
from the film
"The Texas Chainsaw Massacre."
BURNS: I don't know how they
worked it out,
if they had a ticket for him
with the airline,
but we had to screen through the
x-ray."
GRIFFIN: TSA's images mainly
come from security
check incident reports.
And while the stream of
explosives and weapons
might trigger alarm, Burns
contends it shows
the often-criticized agency is
getting the
job done.
BURNS: I think it acts as a
deterrent.
It shows that we're finding
these things,
and if anyone was thinking about
sneaking
something through, they're going
to say, "Well,
maybe I shouldn't, because
they're probably
going to find it."
GRIFFIN: But the TSA's posts
also provide
travel tips.
Really need that five-blade mace
on your vacation?
Put it in your checked bag.
Want to know if you can carry-on
that mini
alligator head?
Tweet @asktsa.
And need to make sure that
laptop you left
at Newark airport last month
gets returned?
BURNS: We recommend people place
their business
card or their contact
information on their
laptop.
GRIFFIN: For the "PBS NewsHour",
I'’m Julia
Griffin at Ronald Reagan
National Airport
in Washington, D.C.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: I'’m just glad they're
going through
it so carefully.
And we'll be back, right here,
on Monday,
with a rare look inside Bruce
Springsteen,
the rock legend.
We'’ll talk about his life, his
music, and
his battles with depression.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'’m Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you and good night.